README.md, before:

# Blueque #

![I'm afraid I just blue myself](http://25.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lcrdvnhC9w1qfo5xwo1_500.jpg)

A simple task queue system optimized for very long running
tasks.

## Terminology ##

* *Queue*

	A list of tasks, of a given type, to be run. Multiple *queues* may
    be used to execute different types of tasks on different *nodes*.

* *Task*

	A piece of work to be done, including its parameters, current
    status, result (if done), etc.

* *Node*

	A computer running tasks from the queue.

* *Listener*

	A process running on a node, listening for new tasks on a single queue.

* *Process*

	A process, running on a *node*, created by a *listener*, executing
    a *task*.

## Data Storage ##

Currently, the backend structure is Redis. Keys should probably be
prefixed with a namespace, i.e. named "bluequeue_foo", so that other
systems can use the Redis DB for other things.

### Task Queue ###

`blueque_pending_tasks_[queue name]`

Stored in a `List`, accessed as a queue: new tasks are added via
`LPUSH`, tasks are removed for execution via `RPOP`. There is a `List`
for each task queue (channel). All that is stored in the `List` is a
task ID, which will be used to retrieve the task data.

### Node Task List ###

`blueque_reserved_tasks_[queue name]_[node name]`

Stored in a `List`, this is used to keep track of which nodes are
running which tasks. Tasks should be atomically moved from the *Task
Queue* to the *Node Task List* via `RPOPLPUSH`, so that they don't get
lost.

### Task Channel ###

Note: this will not be implemented in the first pass.

There is a Pub/Sub `Channel` for each task queue (channel). This can
be used by the worker client to listen for new tasks if the task queue
they were interested in was empty when they last checked for a task.

Messages should *not* include the task ID of the newly created task,
because workers must be required to manually try to `LPOP` the task
off the task queue, so that only one work runs each task.

### Task List ###

`blueque_tasks_[queue name]`

There is a list of all the tasks in a queue, regardless of their
state. This is mostly used for introspection/management purposes.

### Task Data ###

`blueque_task_[task id]`

The actual data associated with a task will be stored as a hash, where
the key is built from the task ID (i.e. "bluequeue_task_NNNN"). Each
subsystem will be able to add its own fields to the hash.

Current fields are

* `status`

	One of: `pending`, `reserved`, `started`, `complete` or `failed`.

* `queue`

	The queue that the task is in (mostly just for debugging
    purposes).

* `parameters`

	JSON serialized parameters which will be passed to the worker
    function; totally task-specific.

* `result`

	JSON serialized result of the task, as returned by the worker
    function; totally task-specific. Will not be set if the task
    hasn't completed yet.

* `node`

	The node ID of the node running the task. Will not be set if the
    task has not been started yet.

* `pid`

	The PID of the process running the task on the node. Will not be
    set if the task has not been started yet.

* `error`

	JSON serialized description of the error. Set only if `status` is
    `failed`.

	TODO: Determine basic structure of this field.

### Nodes ###

In order for the system to be easily introspected, the currently
active nodes will be stored in a Redis `Set`.

TODO: should the "ID" be the hostname or IP address of the node, so
that they are more easily identified?

TODO: should nodes be required to post a "heartbeat" back to their
node key? If so, we could monitor that they are alive, but we would
need to decide how they post back: would the worker function be
responsible for posting back while it is running?

### Queues ###

`blueque_queues`

There is a `Sorted Set` containing the names of all the queues, where
the score of the set is the number of nodes listening to that set.

When a node comes online, it increments the score by 1; when a node
goes offline (cleanly) it increments the score by -1. Every time a
task is enqueued, the score should be incremented by 0, so that a
queue with tasks, but no listeners, still shows up in the set.

## Task Workflow ##

Tasks are executed via this workflow.

### Submission ###

Tasks should be submitted by creating a UUID, [TID], JSON encoding the
parameters, [PARAMS], and then executing:

```
MULTI
HMSET [TID] status pending queue [QUEUE] parameters [PARAMS]
LPUSH [QUEUE] [TID]
EXEC
```

### Node Task Pop ###

Nodes should pop a task off the queue and then set the status of the
task to `started`, and set the `worker` field of the task.

If no task is popped off the queue, the Node should wait for a new
task notification. Ideally, this will be via Pub/Sub, but, at first,
we can do it by polling.

Tasks are popped using the following commands.

```
RPOPLPUSH [QUEUE] [NODE TASKS]
```

```
HMSET [TID] status reserved node [NODE]
```

Note that these two commands cannot be executed atomically because the
second depends on the first, and, even with Lua scripting, that cannot
be done atomically and safely. Therefore, there is a chance that a
task is popped off the pending queue, but its record is not
updated. This can be detected if a task is in a node's queue, but has
a status of `pending`.

### Task Queue Channel Message ###

Note: We will not implement this in the first pass. Workers will just
poll once every few seconds.

If a worker receives a message via a Pub/Sub channel that a queue has
a task in it, it should try to atomically pop a task off that channel
(see above). If it does get a task, it should unsubscribe from the
channel; if it does not (i.e. another worker got the task) it should
remain subscribed.

### Task Started ###

When a process starts executing a task on a node, it should update the
task to indicate that, and also add itself to a set of all active
tasks:

```
MULTI
SADD running_tasks "[NODE ID] [PID] [TASK ID]"
HMSET [TASK ID] status started pid [PID]
EXEC
```

Note that this assumes that the process is told what task to execute,
rather than pulling it off the node's task list.

### Task Completed Successfully ###

If a task completes successfully, it should set the `status` field of
the task to `succeeded` and set the `result` field to the
JSON-serialized result of the task, as a single atomic transaction.

```
MULTI
LREM [WORKER QUEUE] [TASK ID]
LREM running_tasks 1 "[NODE ID] [PID] [TASK ID]"
HMSET [TASK ID] status complete result [RESULT]
LPUSH complete [TASK ID]
EXEC
```

### Task Failed ###

If a task fails for any reason (worker function raises an exception,
or some monitoring process determines that the worker fails more
catastrophically), the process that detects the error should set the
`status` field of the task to `failed` and the `error` field to a
JSON-serialized description of the error (see above).

```
MULTI
LREM [WORKER QUEUE] [TASK ID]
LREM running_tasks 1 "[NODE ID] [PID] [TASK ID]"
HMSET [TASK ID] status failed error [ERROR]
LPUSH failed [TASK ID]
EXEC
```

Commit message:

Keeping a sorted set of queues, where the score is the number of listeners listening to each queue

README.md, after:

# Blueque #

![I'm afraid I just blue myself](http://25.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lcrdvnhC9w1qfo5xwo1_500.jpg)

A simple task queue system optimized for very long running
tasks.

## Terminology ##

* *Queue*

	A list of tasks, of a given type, to be run. Multiple *queues* may
    be used to execute different types of tasks on different *nodes*.

* *Task*

	A piece of work to be done, including its parameters, current
    status, result (if done), etc.

* *Node*

	A computer running tasks from the queue.

* *Listener*

	A process running on a node, listening for new tasks on a single queue.

* *Process*

	A process, running on a *node*, created by a *listener*, executing
    a *task*.

## Data Storage ##

Currently, the backend structure is Redis. Keys should probably be
prefixed with a namespace, i.e. named "bluequeue_foo", so that other
systems can use the Redis DB for other things.

### Task Queue ###

`blueque_pending_tasks_[queue name]`

Stored in a `List`, accessed as a queue: new tasks are added via
`LPUSH`, tasks are removed for execution via `RPOP`. There is a `List`
for each task queue (channel). All that is stored in the `List` is a
task ID, which will be used to retrieve the task data.

### Node Task List ###

`blueque_reserved_tasks_[queue name]_[node name]`

Stored in a `List`, this is used to keep track of which nodes are
running which tasks. Tasks should be atomically moved from the *Task
Queue* to the *Node Task List* via `RPOPLPUSH`, so that they don't get
lost.

### Task Channel ###

Note: this will not be implemented in the first pass.

There is a Pub/Sub `Channel` for each task queue (channel). This can
be used by the worker client to listen for new tasks if the task queue
they were interested in was empty when they last checked for a task.

Messages should *not* include the task ID of the newly created task,
because workers must be required to manually try to `LPOP` the task
off the task queue, so that only one work runs each task.

### Task List ###

`blueque_tasks_[queue name]`

There is a list of all the tasks in a queue, regardless of their
state. This is mostly used for introspection/management purposes.

### Task Data ###

`blueque_task_[task id]`

The actual data associated with a task will be stored as a hash, where
the key is built from the task ID (i.e. "bluequeue_task_NNNN"). Each
subsystem will be able to add its own fields to the hash.

Current fields are

* `status`

	One of: `pending`, `reserved`, `started`, `complete` or `failed`.

* `queue`

	The queue that the task is in (mostly just for debugging
    purposes).

* `parameters`

	JSON serialized parameters which will be passed to the worker
    function; totally task-specific.

* `result`

	JSON serialized result of the task, as returned by the worker
    function; totally task-specific. Will not be set if the task
    hasn't completed yet.

* `node`

	The node ID of the node running the task. Will not be set if the
    task has not been started yet.

* `pid`

	The PID of the process running the task on the node. Will not be
    set if the task has not been started yet.

* `error`

	JSON serialized description of the error. Set only if `status` is
    `failed`.

	TODO: Determine basic structure of this field.

### Listeners ###

`blueque_listeners_[queue name]`

In order for the system to be easily introspected, the currently
active listeners will be stored in a Redis `Set`.

TODO: should the "ID" be the hostname or IP address of the node, so
that they are more easily identified?

TODO: should nodes be required to post a "heartbeat" back to their
node key? If so, we could monitor that they are alive, but we would
need to decide how they post back: would the worker function be
responsible for posting back while it is running?

### Queues ###

`blueque_queues`

There is a `Sorted Set` containing the names of all the queues, where
the score of the set is the number of nodes listening to that set.

When a node comes online, it increments the score by 1; when a node
goes offline (cleanly) it increments the score by -1. Every time a
task is enqueued, the score should be incremented by 0, so that a
queue with tasks, but no listeners, still shows up in the set.

## Task Workflow ##

Tasks are executed via this workflow.

### Submission ###

Tasks should be submitted by creating a UUID, [TID], JSON encoding the
parameters, [PARAMS], and then executing:

```
MULTI
HMSET [TID] status pending queue [QUEUE] parameters [PARAMS]
LPUSH [QUEUE] [TID]
EXEC
```

### Node Task Pop ###

Nodes should pop a task off the queue and then set the status of the
task to `started`, and set the `worker` field of the task.

If no task is popped off the queue, the Node should wait for a new
task notification. Ideally, this will be via Pub/Sub, but, at first,
we can do it by polling.

Tasks are popped using the following commands.

```
RPOPLPUSH [QUEUE] [NODE TASKS]
```

```
HMSET [TID] status reserved node [NODE]
```

Note that these two commands cannot be executed atomically because the
second depends on the first, and, even with Lua scripting, that cannot
be done atomically and safely. Therefore, there is a chance that a
task is popped off the pending queue, but its record is not
updated. This can be detected if a task is in a node's queue, but has
a status of `pending`.

### Task Queue Channel Message ###

Note: We will not implement this in the first pass. Workers will just
poll once every few seconds.

If a worker receives a message via a Pub/Sub channel that a queue has
a task in it, it should try to atomically pop a task off that channel
(see above). If it does get a task, it should unsubscribe from the
channel; if it does not (i.e. another worker got the task) it should
remain subscribed.

### Task Started ###

When a process starts executing a task on a node, it should update the
task to indicate that, and also add itself to a set of all active
tasks:

```
MULTI
SADD running_tasks "[NODE ID] [PID] [TASK ID]"
HMSET [TASK ID] status started pid [PID]
EXEC
```

Note that this assumes that the process is told what task to execute,
rather than pulling it off the node's task list.

### Task Completed Successfully ###

If a task completes successfully, it should set the `status` field of
the task to `succeeded` and set the `result` field to the
JSON-serialized result of the task, as a single atomic transaction.

```
MULTI
LREM [WORKER QUEUE] [TASK ID]
LREM running_tasks 1 "[NODE ID] [PID] [TASK ID]"
HMSET [TASK ID] status complete result [RESULT]
LPUSH complete [TASK ID]
EXEC
```

### Task Failed ###

If a task fails for any reason (worker function raises an exception,
or some monitoring process determines that the worker fails more
catastrophically), the process that detects the error should set the
`status` field of the task to `failed` and the `error` field to a
JSON-serialized description of the error (see above).

```
MULTI
LREM [WORKER QUEUE] [TASK ID]
LREM running_tasks 1 "[NODE ID] [PID] [TASK ID]"
HMSET [TASK ID] status failed error [ERROR]
LPUSH failed [TASK ID]
EXEC
```
